README.md, before:

## Introduction

This readme was based on the readme for the open-source version of RTMA, Dragonfly (https://github.com/dragonfly-msg/dragonfly). It is possible that some of the setup instructions here are incorrect.
Please report any issues by reporting on github or bugging your preferred RNEL engineer.

RTMA is a simple messaging system that helps programmers create modular distributed 
applications rapidly. It hides the complexities of socket programming and data translation, also provides a uniform 
high-level API in each of the supported programming languages (C++, C#, Python, Matlab) 
and operating systems (Windows, Linux). Therefore, programmers are able to write each part of 
their application in their programming language of choice and on their operating system of choice 
without having to worry about how the modules will communicate with each other.

RTMA consists of several components: a central message exchange daemon (MessageManager), 
a data logger daemon (Logger), and utilities to create message definitions in all supported programming languages.

RTMA uses a client-server architecture where MessageManager is the central server and software 
modules that would like to talk to each other are the clients. MessageManager keeps a listening socket for modules 
to connect to and start sending messages. All messages go through MessageManager which forwards 
them to the connected modules based on their subscriptions. Modules connect to MessageManager, subscribe 
to message types they care about, send messages that will be forwarded by MessageManager to all modules 
that have subscribed to those message types, and receive messages that they themselves have subscribed to. 
The modules remain independent of each other and do not have to know which modules will consume their messages or 
where the messages they consume originate.


## History

The Real-Time Messaging Architecture (RTMA) was first developed by Meel Velliste and Sagi Perel
for use in the development of brain-computer interface development.

Publications whose experiments utilized RTMA Messaging include:
- Velliste, M., Perel, S., Spalding, M. C., Whitford, A. S., & Schwartz, A. B. (2008). **Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding.** Nature, 453(7198), 1098-101. doi:10.1038/nature06996
- Clanton, S. T., McMorland, A. J. C., Zohny, Z., Jeffries, S. M., Rasmussen, R. G., Flesher, S. N., & Velliste, M. (2013). **Seven Degree of Freedom Cortical Control of a Robotic Arm.** In C. Guger, B. Z. Allison, & G. Edlinger (Eds.), Brain-Computer Interface Research (pp. 73-81). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36083-1
- Collinger, J. L., Wodlinger, B., Downey, J. E., Wang, W., Tyler-Kabara, E. C., Weber, D. J., McMorland, A. J. C., Velliste, M., Boninger, M. L., Schwartz, A. B. (2012). **High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia.** The Lancet. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61816-9

## Prerequisites

Bare minimum requirement is that you have a C++ compiler installed. On linux/mac, you also need to have qt-qmake (from qt4 or qt5)
installed (in a future release, this requirement may be eliminated). If you'd like to have support for other languages, 
see below further requirements:

#### Python
- Version >= 2.6 (python3.7 preferred)
- Install swig >= 2.0.3 (make sure swig executable is on Path. Latest SWIG 4.1 works.) (http://www.swig.org/download.html)
- Install Clang and ctypeslib2 python packages
	`pip install clang` and `pip install ctypeslib2`
- Previously a package called "ctypesgen" was used instead of clang/ctypeslib2. This has recently been updated to support Python3 and can be used as an alternative to clang/ctypeslib2 if there are any issues with clang/ctypeslib2. This package can be found on GitHub.
- Install LLVM-Clang compiler
  - Windows/Linux: http://releases.llvm.org/download.html
  - MacOS: Install XCode command line tools (Clang is default compiler on MacOS). You may also need to link libclang.dylib to a standard library location (e.g. ~/lib or where ever you copy libRTMA.dylib, see Linux/Mac Installation step 4. below)
  - Note: the latest version of LLVM may not work with the clang python bindings. For best results, check python bindings version with `pip show clang` and install the same version of LLVM.


#### C&#35;
- Windows only, Visual Studio 2005 or later. Latest VS2022 preferred.

#### Matlab 
- Version >= 2007b
- Configure Matlab to recognize the Visual Studio C++ compiler


## Installation

#### Linux/Mac

Clone the repository and compile the source as follows:

1. If planning to use the python interface, the makefile in `RTMA/lang/python` may need to be manually edited to correctly set variables (i.e. point to the correct python install location)

2. In a terminal execute the following:

        cd RTMA/build
        ./build_with_qmake.sh

3. Create `RTMA` environment variable and set it to where your RTMA folder is (optional but can be used when building C++ modules)

4. Copy `RTMA/lib/libRTMA.so` to `/usr/lib` or add `RTMA/lib` to `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` 
    *  On older versions of MacOS, setting DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH may work. On recent versions of Mac (>= El Capitan), this no longer works due to System Integrity Protection (SIP). Instead, the .so file can be moved, copied, or hard linked via the `ln` command (e.g. `ln -s /path/to/original /path/to/link`) to standard library locations (~/lib, /usr/lib, or /usr/local/lib).
    * Installing the library with a symlink (`ln -s`) to /usr/local/lib works well on Linux as well. You will likely need to run `sudo ldconfig` after linking the library so that the system recongnizes it.

5. If you plan to use the matlab interface, start matlab and execute the following:

        cd RTMA/lang/matlab
        make
        cd RTMA/src/modules/QuickLogger/LogReader
        make

6. If you plan to use the python interface, append `RTMA/lang/python` to `PYTHONPATH` environment variable
        

#### Windows

If you'd like to compile from source, clone the repository and follow these instructions:

1. Build `RTMA/build/RTMA.sln` with Visual Studio (2005 or later)

2. Create `RTMA` environment variable and set it to where your RTMA folder is (optional, but can be used to build C++ modules)

3. If you plan to use the python 2/3 interfaces, 
    * Set `PYTHON2_BASE` and `PYTHON3_BASE` environment variables to respective python 2 and 3 install locations (e.g. C:\Python\Anaconda3 and C:\Python\Anaconda3\envs\py27)
    * Set `PYTHON2_LIB` and `PYTHON3_LIB` environment variables (ex: %PYTHON3_BASE%\libs)
    * Set `PYTHON2_INCLUDE` and `PYTHON3_INCLUDE` environment variables (ex: %PYTHON3_BASE%\include)
    * Build `RTMA\lang\python\PyRTMA.sln` with Visual Studio (tested with VS 2019)
    * Add `%RTMA%\lang\python` to `PYTHONPATH` environment variable
	
4. If you plan to use the Matlab interface, start matlab and execute the following:
    	
        cd RTMA\lang\matlab
        make
        cd RTMA\src\modules\QuickLogger\LogReader
        make
    Note that 64-bit Windows mex files are tracked in the repo and this step is usually unecessary when running 64-bit Windows


## Directory Organization
- `bin`    
    executable modules
- `build`    
    source code build scripts
- `examples`    
    example programs showing how to use RTMA
- `include`  
    include files for the C++ API
- `lang`     
    APIs for other languages
- `lib`      
    library files for the C++ API
- `src`      
    source code for C++ API and executable modules


## API Summary
- ConnectToMMM(ModuleID, ServerAddress)
- DisconnectFromMMM()
- Subscribe(MessageType)
- Unsubscribe(MessageType)
- ReadMessage(Timeout)
- SendMessage(MessageType, MessageData)
- SendSignal(MessageType)


## Example Code
`RTMA/examples` folder contains ready to run modules in all supported languages. See the README.txt file 
in each example folder for further information.


## Creating Message Definitions
RTMA uses standard C header files to describe message definitions.

Each message consists of a message type and an optional message body. 

The message type is an integer that should be selected to uniquely identify each message. 
It is set with a `#define` statement and the name of the message needs to begin with `MT_`.
Here is an example: 

        #define MT_ROBOT_FEEDBACK               100
        
The message body is a `struct` composed of one or more data fields which can be standard [C data types](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_data_types) 
and other structs. The struct has to have the same message name as the message type, and it needs to begin with `MDF_`. 
Here is an example:
        
        typedef struct {
          double    position;
          double    velocity;
          double    force;
        } MDF_ROBOT_FEEDBACK;        

Here is a more complex example:

        typedef struct {
            int     SerialNo;
            int     Flags;
            double  dt;
        } SAMPLE_HEADER;

        #define MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS     10
        typedef struct {
          SAMPLE_HEADER sample_header;
          double        position[MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS];
          double        velocity[MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS];
          double        force[MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS];
        } MDF_ROBOT_FEEDBACK;

The message body fields need to be manually padded for [data alignment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_alignment) as necessary. 
The following is an example of how to define the fields for 64-bit alignment:

        typedef struct {
          int source_index;    		
          int reserved;        		// for 64-bit alignment
          double source_timestamp;
        } MDF_RAW_SAMPLE_RESPONSE;

If you are not sure how to align message fields on your system, it is safe to use 64-bit alignment. 
Even if your system is not 64-bit, or if you have a mixture of systems with different alignment requirements,
this practice will ensure proper alignment.

Commit message:

Added notes about versions of clang and ctypeslib2 that are known to work.

README.md, after:

## Introduction

This readme was based on the readme for the open-source version of RTMA, Dragonfly (https://github.com/dragonfly-msg/dragonfly). It is possible that some of the setup instructions here are incorrect.
Please report any issues by reporting on github or bugging your preferred RNEL engineer.

RTMA is a simple messaging system that helps programmers create modular distributed 
applications rapidly. It hides the complexities of socket programming and data translation, also provides a uniform 
high-level API in each of the supported programming languages (C++, C#, Python, Matlab) 
and operating systems (Windows, Linux). Therefore, programmers are able to write each part of 
their application in their programming language of choice and on their operating system of choice 
without having to worry about how the modules will communicate with each other.

RTMA consists of several components: a central message exchange daemon (MessageManager), 
a data logger daemon (Logger), and utilities to create message definitions in all supported programming languages.

RTMA uses a client-server architecture where MessageManager is the central server and software 
modules that would like to talk to each other are the clients. MessageManager keeps a listening socket for modules 
to connect to and start sending messages. All messages go through MessageManager which forwards 
them to the connected modules based on their subscriptions. Modules connect to MessageManager, subscribe 
to message types they care about, send messages that will be forwarded by MessageManager to all modules 
that have subscribed to those message types, and receive messages that they themselves have subscribed to. 
The modules remain independent of each other and do not have to know which modules will consume their messages or 
where the messages they consume originate.


## History

The Real-Time Messaging Architecture (RTMA) was first developed by Meel Velliste and Sagi Perel
for use in the development of brain-computer interface development.

Publications whose experiments utilized RTMA Messaging include:
- Velliste, M., Perel, S., Spalding, M. C., Whitford, A. S., & Schwartz, A. B. (2008). **Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding.** Nature, 453(7198), 1098-101. doi:10.1038/nature06996
- Clanton, S. T., McMorland, A. J. C., Zohny, Z., Jeffries, S. M., Rasmussen, R. G., Flesher, S. N., & Velliste, M. (2013). **Seven Degree of Freedom Cortical Control of a Robotic Arm.** In C. Guger, B. Z. Allison, & G. Edlinger (Eds.), Brain-Computer Interface Research (pp. 73-81). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36083-1
- Collinger, J. L., Wodlinger, B., Downey, J. E., Wang, W., Tyler-Kabara, E. C., Weber, D. J., McMorland, A. J. C., Velliste, M., Boninger, M. L., Schwartz, A. B. (2012). **High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia.** The Lancet. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61816-9

## Prerequisites

Bare minimum requirement is that you have a C++ compiler installed. On linux/mac, you also need to have qt-qmake (from qt4 or qt5)
installed (in a future release, this requirement may be eliminated). If you'd like to have support for other languages, 
see below further requirements:

#### Python
- Version >= 2.6 (python3.7 preferred)
- Install swig >= 2.0.3 (make sure swig executable is on Path. Latest SWIG 4.1 works.) (http://www.swig.org/download.html)
- Install Clang and ctypeslib2 python packages (ctypeslib2 v2.2.2 known to work)
	`pip install clang` and `pip install ctypeslib2==2.2.2`
- Previously a package called "ctypesgen" was used instead of clang/ctypeslib2. This has recently been updated to support Python3 and can be used as an alternative to clang/ctypeslib2 if there are any issues with clang/ctypeslib2. This package can be found on GitHub.
- Install LLVM-Clang compiler (version 11.0 known to work)
  - Windows/Linux: http://releases.llvm.org/download.html
  - MacOS: Install XCode command line tools (Clang is default compiler on MacOS). You may also need to link libclang.dylib to a standard library location (e.g. ~/lib or where ever you copy libRTMA.dylib, see Linux/Mac Installation step 4. below)
  - Note: the latest version of LLVM may not work with the clang python bindings. For best results, check python bindings version with `pip show clang` and install the same version of LLVM.


#### C&#35;
- Windows only, Visual Studio 2005 or later. Latest VS2022 preferred.

#### Matlab 
- Version >= 2007b
- Configure Matlab to recognize the Visual Studio C++ compiler


## Installation

#### Linux/Mac

Clone the repository and compile the source as follows:

1. If planning to use the python interface, the makefile in `RTMA/lang/python` may need to be manually edited to correctly set variables (i.e. point to the correct python install location)

2. In a terminal execute the following:

        cd RTMA/build
        ./build_with_qmake.sh

3. Create `RTMA` environment variable and set it to where your RTMA folder is (optional but can be used when building C++ modules)

4. Copy `RTMA/lib/libRTMA.so` to `/usr/lib` or add `RTMA/lib` to `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` 
    *  On older versions of MacOS, setting DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH may work. On recent versions of Mac (>= El Capitan), this no longer works due to System Integrity Protection (SIP). Instead, the .so file can be moved, copied, or hard linked via the `ln` command (e.g. `ln -s /path/to/original /path/to/link`) to standard library locations (~/lib, /usr/lib, or /usr/local/lib).
    * Installing the library with a symlink (`ln -s`) to /usr/local/lib works well on Linux as well. You will likely need to run `sudo ldconfig` after linking the library so that the system recongnizes it.

5. If you plan to use the matlab interface, start matlab and execute the following:

        cd RTMA/lang/matlab
        make
        cd RTMA/src/modules/QuickLogger/LogReader
        make

6. If you plan to use the python interface, append `RTMA/lang/python` to `PYTHONPATH` environment variable
        

#### Windows

If you'd like to compile from source, clone the repository and follow these instructions:

1. Build `RTMA/build/RTMA.sln` with Visual Studio (2005 or later)

2. Create `RTMA` environment variable and set it to where your RTMA folder is (optional, but can be used to build C++ modules)

3. If you plan to use the python 2/3 interfaces, 
    * Set `PYTHON2_BASE` and `PYTHON3_BASE` environment variables to respective python 2 and 3 install locations (e.g. C:\Python\Anaconda3 and C:\Python\Anaconda3\envs\py27)
    * Set `PYTHON2_LIB` and `PYTHON3_LIB` environment variables (ex: %PYTHON3_BASE%\libs)
    * Set `PYTHON2_INCLUDE` and `PYTHON3_INCLUDE` environment variables (ex: %PYTHON3_BASE%\include)
    * Build `RTMA\lang\python\PyRTMA.sln` with Visual Studio (tested with VS 2019)
    * Add `%RTMA%\lang\python` to `PYTHONPATH` environment variable
	
4. If you plan to use the Matlab interface, start matlab and execute the following:
    	
        cd RTMA\lang\matlab
        make
        cd RTMA\src\modules\QuickLogger\LogReader
        make
    Note that 64-bit Windows mex files are tracked in the repo and this step is usually unecessary when running 64-bit Windows


## Directory Organization
- `bin`    
    executable modules
- `build`    
    source code build scripts
- `examples`    
    example programs showing how to use RTMA
- `include`  
    include files for the C++ API
- `lang`     
    APIs for other languages
- `lib`      
    library files for the C++ API
- `src`      
    source code for C++ API and executable modules


## API Summary
- ConnectToMMM(ModuleID, ServerAddress)
- DisconnectFromMMM()
- Subscribe(MessageType)
- Unsubscribe(MessageType)
- ReadMessage(Timeout)
- SendMessage(MessageType, MessageData)
- SendSignal(MessageType)


## Example Code
`RTMA/examples` folder contains ready to run modules in all supported languages. See the README.txt file 
in each example folder for further information.


## Creating Message Definitions
RTMA uses standard C header files to describe message definitions.

Each message consists of a message type and an optional message body. 

The message type is an integer that should be selected to uniquely identify each message. 
It is set with a `#define` statement and the name of the message needs to begin with `MT_`.
Here is an example: 

        #define MT_ROBOT_FEEDBACK               100
        
The message body is a `struct` composed of one or more data fields which can be standard [C data types](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_data_types) 
and other structs. The struct has to have the same message name as the message type, and it needs to begin with `MDF_`. 
Here is an example:
        
        typedef struct {
          double    position;
          double    velocity;
          double    force;
        } MDF_ROBOT_FEEDBACK;        

Here is a more complex example:

        typedef struct {
            int     SerialNo;
            int     Flags;
            double  dt;
        } SAMPLE_HEADER;

        #define MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS     10
        typedef struct {
          SAMPLE_HEADER sample_header;
          double        position[MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS];
          double        velocity[MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS];
          double        force[MAX_ROBOT_FEEDBACK_DIMS];
        } MDF_ROBOT_FEEDBACK;

The message body fields need to be manually padded for [data alignment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_alignment) as necessary. 
The following is an example of how to define the fields for 64-bit alignment:

        typedef struct {
          int source_index;    		
          int reserved;        		// for 64-bit alignment
          double source_timestamp;
        } MDF_RAW_SAMPLE_RESPONSE;

If you are not sure how to align message fields on your system, it is safe to use 64-bit alignment. 
Even if your system is not 64-bit, or if you have a mixture of systems with different alignment requirements,
this practice will ensure proper alignment.
